Phase 1: Data Auditing (EDA)

Prior to fitting any model, the data needs to be inspected and quality issues identified.
Dataset Structure :Use df.info() and df.shape to verify a dataframe of ~500k rows and ~30 columns. Make sure to check if numerical columns like productbaseprice, finalprice, totalamount, shipping_cost are numeric type and dates are cast to datetime object.
Missing Values Check the percentage of missing values by using: (df.isnull().sum()/len(df))*100 Remove features having more than 40% of missing data Impute numerical missing data with median values Impute categorical missing values with mode values 
Data Quality Check Look for impossible values like Negative price values,Negative quantity, Ratings outside range, negative delivery days and Unrealistic customer age
Duplicate Records Remove duplicate order IDs,as the will skew metrics (total revenue, total quantity, percentage of returns etc.)
Initial Insights Features that should need special attention- city (high cardinality) loyaltytier(ordinal) returnreason (might be mostly populated only for returned items) monetary features may contain outliers

Phase 2: Pricing Data Skewness Analysis Business hypothesizes that some of pricing related features are highly skewed and concentrated.

Variables to Analyze- productbaseprice, finalprice, totalamount, customerlifetimevalue.
Statistical Analysis Computeskewness for pricing-related variables using: df['total_amount'].skew() Understandingskewness: values close to 0 are symmetric, values between 0.5 and 1 are moderately skewed, values greater than 1 are highly skewed.
Visualization Generate Histograms with KDE plots for pricing features Generate Boxplots for pricing features.
Business Intuition is expected that most transactions will be in low and mid price range with a few extremely high price transactions.
ML Implication As it's expected monetary related variables to be skewed, consider usingRobustScaler instead ofStandardScaler, also log transformations (e.g., np.log1p) can be used for extreme skewness.

Phase 3: Categorical Columns That Require Special Handling

High Cardinality Features city
Challenge: High cardinality leads to a large number of dummy variables, which can increase model complexity and risk of overfitting.
Solution: Use Target Encoding to represent the city based on its average target variable value.
Ordinal Features loyalty_tier
Challenge: The business hierarchy (Bronze < Silver < Gold < Platinum) is meaningful, but One-Hot Encoding would discard this ranking.
Solution: Use Ordinal Encoding to preserve the order of loyalty tiers.
Nominal Features - category - subcategory - paymentmethod - shippingmethod - customergender - country Solution: Use One-Hot Encoding.
Data Cleaning Standardize categorical text values before encoding to prevent the same category from being represented multiple times due to formatting issues (e.g., capitalization, leading/trailing spaces).
df['city'] = df['city'].str.lower().str.strip()

Phase 4: Understanding Product Returns

Target Variable: is_returned
The main goal of this phase is to analyze various features that are most likely to explain the product returns and can provide actionable business insights.
Category Analysis - Analyze return rate by category. - Analyze return rate by sub_category. - Business Question: Which product categories have the highest return rates?
Loyalty Tier Analysis - Analyze return rates across different loyalty_tiers (Bronze, Silver, Gold, Platinum). - Business Question: Do loyalty program members have lower return rates?
Delivery Analysis - Analyze the relationship between daystodeliver and is_returned. - Business Question: Do deliveries with longer delivery times result in more returns?
Pricing Analysis - Analyze the relationship between totalamount, finalprice, and discountpercentage with isreturned. - Business Question: Are heavily discounted or low-priced items returned more frequently?
Customer Behavior Analysis - Analyze the impact of customerlifetimevalue, isfirstpurchase, sessiondurationmins, pagesviewed on isreturned. - Business Question: Are first-time buyers more likely to return products?
Return Reasons - Analyze the frequency of different return_reason values. - Business Question: What are the most common reasons for product returns?

Phase 5: Feature Engineering Pipeline

The preprocessing pipeline will include the following transformations to prepare the data for machine learning: Standard Scaling - Apply to numerical features that are not expected to contain significant outliers: quantity, rating, numreviews, customerage, pagesviewed, clicksto_purchase.
Robust Scaling - Apply to numerical features that are expected to have outliers: productbaseprice, finalprice, totalamount, shippingcost, customerlifetimevalue, sessionduration_mins.
One-Hot Encoding - Apply to nominal categorical features: category, subcategory, paymentmethod, shippingmethod, customergender, country, isfirstpurchase.
Ordinal Encoding - Apply to the ordinal categorical feature: loyalty_tier.
Target Encoding - Apply to the high cardinality categorical feature: city. This will encode the city based on the average value of the is_returned target.

Phase 6: Correlation Analysis and Predictive Features

This phase involves understanding feature interdependencies and identifying the most impactful predictors for product returns.
Correlation Analysis
- Calculate and visualize the Pearson correlation matrix for all numerical features (including scaled ones).
- Identify any strongly correlated features that might indicate redundancy or require careful consideration in model selection.
Statistical Tests
- Perform Chi-Square tests to assess the statistical significance of relationships between categorical features (category, paymentmethod, shippingmethod, loyaltytier) and the binary target variable (isreturned).
- These tests will help determine which categorical variables are meaningful predictors of returns.
Feature Importance
- Train a baseline machine learning model (e.g., Random Forest Classifier or Gradient Boosting Classifier) on the preprocessed data.
- Extract and analyze the feature importance scores from the trained model.
- Identify the features that contribute most to the model's ability to predict returns.
- Expected high-impact predictors might include: daystodeliver, discountpercentage, customerlifetimevalue, loyaltytier, category, isfirstpurchase, totalamount, shippingmethod.
Final Business Goal
The ultimate objective is to leverage the insights gained from this analysis and the trained predictive model to help RetailIQ:
 - Reduce overall return rates.
 - Enhance customer satisfaction by addressing return drivers proactively.
 - Optimize shipping operations to minimize delays and related returns.
 - Improve targeting strategies for loyalty programs.
 - Ultimately, increase overall profitability.
